It's Rachel in Tel Aviv. Before we get
to the rest of today's show, here's an
update from the Middle East.
On Monday, after Hamas returned 20
living hostages from Gaza,
Israel began releasing nearly 2,000
Palestinian prisoners back to Gaza and
the West Bank.
Large crowds gathered near Nasser
Hospital in Kyunis, where released
Palestinian prisoners were taken.
Good afternoon. Good evening.
>> Hi, Mustafa. It's nice to hear your
voice. I talked to Mustafa Abu Taha, an
English teacher in Gaza I've been in
touch with since the start of the war.
Mustafa, can you describe the scene when
the Palestinian prisoners returned? What
did it look like outside? He was there
amongst the crowd.
This is I would say the biggest, the
largest, the most enormous a crowd I
have ever seen in my life in Gaza. I
have seen mountains of people. So you
know words are not enough to describe
how people you know are feeling so
amazed and all of them start waving,
shouting, dancing. I dance and I sang a
song.
>> What did you sing Mustafa?
>> Freedom is back. Freedom is back.
After two years of devastation,
destruction, mass killing, the war has
come to an end. We want peace to prevent
that.
>> You said that the war has come to an
end, Mustafa, but there are so many
details to be worked out yet. So, I'm
just wondering how confident and
optimistic you feel about that.
It's okay because the American President
Donald Trump said the war is over and
war is over.
Thank you very much everybody.
>> Meanwhile in Jerusalem,
>> this is not only the end of a war. This
is the end of a age of terror and death
and the beginning of the age of faith
and hope and of God.
>> Trump brought his message of peace to
the Israeli parliament.
>> It's the start of a grand concord and
lasting harmony for Israel and all the
nations of what will soon be a truly
magnificent region. I believe that so
strongly. This is the historic dawn of a
new Middle East.
My colleague David Sanger is covering
Trump's trip to the Middle East.
David, you are in Jerusalem where
President Trump actually spoke to the
Israeli Parliament Kesset and you
watched the speech. It appeared to me
that he was clearly taking a victory
lap. And I'm curious what your takeaway
was.
>> He was taking an agilation lap. I mean,
when Air Force One came down over
Hostages Square, you heard people
yelling, "Trump, Trump!" And it kept up.
When he got to the Ness, the parliament,
almost every place he went from both the
Netanyahu government and even the
opposition, he was given the credit for
the final turn of the screw that got
Hamas to release the last hostages. And
tonight, as we speak, there are no
living hostages in Gaza. That's been the
first time in years,
>> right?
>> But what was really interesting today
though, Rachel, was Trump's message. He
said explicitly, as far as I'm
concerned, the war is over. You didn't
hear that from BB Netanyahu, the prime
minister.
>> That contrast really struck me. Trump
seems like he's projecting this idea
that he has made peace, but Netanyahu
has been really much more circumspect on
where we are in the peace process. He
has not committed to the war being over.
>> That's exactly right, Rachel. And the
reason is simple. President Trump turned
out a 20point plan, then twisted
Netanyahu's arm to get him to sign onto
it. Netanyahu did on the assumption not
incorrect that there were things in
there Hamas couldn't agree to starting
with the fact that Hamas would have to
disarm long one of Netanyahu's demands
and move out of Gaza and give up any
rights or thought of controlling it. So
when Hamas came back, they agreed to
part one, which was the hostage release
in return for getting hundreds of
Palestinian prisoners out of Israeli
jails. But they said they would have to
go negotiate on the remaining issues,
including disarming.
>> And President Trump just took a partial
yes as an answer, and said that
constitutes a peace agreement, which it
didn't. He didn't seem to say much about
the future of Gaza though, did he?
>> You know, Rachel, that was the big
missing element of the speech. And the
speech went on for more than an hour. He
went way off script. He told stories
about Steve Wickoff meeting Vladimir
Putin, which had nothing to do with the
Middle East. He told stories about his
son-in-law, Jared Kushner, who was
there, who played a big role in this.
But what he didn't do was talk to the
Israeli Parliament about what they
needed to do next. He never mentioned a
two-state solution or an alternative to
a two-state solution. So he never talked
about the hard choices Israel would have
to make. He kept it all at the level of
kind of happy talk.
>> Now those details, Rachel, they were
supposed to be the next part of the
trip. He went to Charmeal Shake in Egypt
and met with nearly 30 world leaders.
They were supposed to make some
decisions about an international
stabilization force which would go in to
basically keep the peace in Gaza. They
were supposed to make some decisions
about who would pay to rebuild Gaza,
what it would look like, but Israel
wasn't there and Hamas wasn't there
>> and the meeting just wasn't long enough
to go into any depth about getting this
done in Gaza.
>> Do we have any indication about what
came out of that summit?
>> We don't know a whole lot of details
now. We know they signed a document that
basically signed these countries up to
the president's 20 points, but you know,
this was very Donald Trump the
developer. I'm going to come in with a
big concept and then you people can go
off and work out the details. The
problem is in diplomacy, it frequently
doesn't work that way. And the big worry
that I have, Rachel, is that we've got
tremendous momentum now. This was an
incredibly emotional day. People around
the world were engaged. And the question
is, can you keep Donald Trump engaged
now that he declares that he has brought
about peace? And can you keep the rest
of the world engaged in the really hard,
detailed work of rebuilding Gaza?
>> David, thank you so much.
>> Thank you, Rachel.
Okay, here's Michael with the rest of
today's show.
[Music]
From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Babaro. This is the daily.
[Music]
It's day 12 of the government shutdown.
Now, President Trump is ordering mass
federal layoffs. In a court filing, the
budget office said more than 4,000
employees across several agencies will
receive layoff notices. The shutdown of
the US government, for which there is no
end in sight, has given the Trump
administration an extraordinary amount
of power to remake and in some cases to
decimate dozens of agencies. The
departments of commerce, education,
homeland security, and the CDC are just
some of the agencies impacted. In many
ways, it's a power that the
administration learned how to wield
during two extraordinary weeks back in
January when it systematically destroyed
USID.
Today, Chris FL on what he learned from
reconstructing the death of that agency
from the inside.
It's Tuesday, October 14th.
[Music]
Chris, throughout the government
shutdown that's now entering its third
week, the threat that the Trump
administration has issued is that it
might use the shutdown as the rationale
to gut the federal bureaucracy, further
gut the federal bureaucracy. And you
have spent a lot of time trying to
reconstruct what I would argue is the
single greatest act of government
gutting by this White House since it
took back power in January. And so we
wondered what lessons you learned from
that reporting that might apply to this
moment to this shutdown. Yeah, the
moment feels like a lifetime ago, but
think back to the first few days of the
new Trump administration when, as you
said, they wiped out an entire
government agency, USAD, the agency for
international developments in a matter
of days. And it was so complete and so
sort of shocking at the time to
basically get rid of 10,000 federal
workers that I wanted to go back to it
and understand what happened and what
was the thinking behind it. What was the
strategy? And what I found out was there
wasn't in fact a plan to kill off USAD.
At least not at first.
>> It happened a little bit on the fly.
sort of a series of decisions and
clashes that built on each other to
advance an agenda that is ideologically
consistent but not it turned out all
that planned out. They were looking for
opportunities and willing to use them
really aggressively when they came up. H
it's interesting that you have found
that the obliteration of USA ID was
essentially improvised because right now
during this shutdown the threat of
traumas to the federal government like
what happened at USA ID feels quite
explicit.
That's exactly right. And I think the
reason the case study of USAD remains
really instructive today is it shows how
they were willing to improvise and how
effective that could be. And I think
that applies in an important way to the
shutdown where it tells us maybe the
outcome of the shutdown will not be
dictated just by what is strictly legal
but also outcomes that we couldn't have
imagined when it began. Well, Chris,
take us inside the story that you have
pieced together of this two weeks during
which USAD went from a fully functioning
agency to ultimately vanishing. Yeah,
it's really the story of just a few key
characters. Let's start with a man named
Jason Gray.
Longtime federal civil servant, worked
at a number of big agencies. Crucially,
had only been at aid for about 2 years
when he was picked at the very beginning
of this administration, almost without
warning, to be in charge of USAD. Now,
the fact that Jason Gray didn't have the
kind of experience someone would usually
have to run an agency like USAD became
important when on that very same day, on
the first day in office, Donald Trump
signed an executive order freezing
foreign aid. That order wasn't
surprising. He it indicated he would do
something similar, but something about
that order turned to be really
important. It was actually unclear what
it meant. M the order confusingly said
that the government would quote
immediately pause new obligations and
dispersements but a lot of the money
that was flowing at USA ID was for
projects around the world already in
existence so that left open the question
well what happens to those should those
stop as well the people I spoke with
said the idea that President Trump would
stop existing programs which is sort of
a little crazy right probably illegal so
they didn't even think That would be
what it was,
>> right? And I'm not a lawyer, but hearing
the language from this executive order,
pause new obligations certainly sounds
like pause new spending, not old
spending.
>> That's exactly right. And in fact, it
seemed so obvious to the people inside
USAD that they didn't give much thought.
And the result was most programs just
kept continuing as they were. But this
is where we introduce our second main
character. Pete Morocco was a key figure
in the first Trump administration. He
had a stint actually at USAD in the
closing months of that administration.
Was remembered as being very hard
charging, very aggressive, being very
eager, I'm told, to enforce President
Trump's agenda and left people a little
unhappy. He eventually left after just a
few months at USAD. Well, Pete Morocco
suddenly re-emerges in the early days of
the second Trump administration because
he has a senior role at the State
Department where as director of foreign
assistance, he has some authority over
USAD. And all of a sudden, just a few
days into this new administration, he
calls senior staff at USAD. He says,
"Hey, it's come to my attention that AID
is still spending money in violation of
this executive order. This is a real
problem." And he said he wanted to get
to the bottom of it.
Okay. So, suddenly you have a clashing
view of what this executive order says.
You got the newbie head of the agency a
little out of his depth seeing the
language of the order and saying, "I'm
all good." You got the old line hard
charging Trump figure coming in and
saying you're totally wrong here. All
spending is now done. That's right. So,
here we are. This is just like 4 days in
to the new administration. Senior
officials at the top of USAD gather for
a meeting in the agency's headquarters
just a few blocks from the White House
and they said, "No, you know what? We've
looked at this. We think this is all
above board. the way we spend money can
be complicated. Perhaps they said to
themselves, Pete Morocco just maybe
doesn't understand the way money flows
from USA ID. We can fix this. And so the
plan they left that meeting with was
we'll explain ourselves to Pete Morocco
and this should be fine,
>> right? Problem solved.
>> And of course that's not what happened.
The following Monday, this is one week
into the new administration. Pete
Morocco for the first time shows up at
the USAD headquarters and he says he's
there because he wants to keep on
digging. He's not convinced this problem
is fixed. And crucially, he's not alone.
>> He brings with him members of the
Department of Government Efficiency. And
he says they're there to help him figure
out what went wrong. And I think people
at this point as we speak today know all
about Doge, right? Doge is under Elon
Musk and went around looking for severe
cuts and for ways to get rid of staff.
But this is just one week in. People
don't yet know at this point what Doge
is all about. They didn't yet realize
just how serious it was for Doge to be
in the building. In fact, this is one of
the first agencies that Doge went to.
>> Mhm. It was only later that day that
people began to realize what Doge was
there to do because that afternoon,
senior figures from Doge made a demand.
They went into Jason Gay's office with a
list of 57 senior officials at USAD and
said, "We've done some digging. We think
these 57 people were involved in these
payments. We want them put on
administrative leave and sent home." So
suddenly Doge is operating as kind of a
search and destroy operation to find the
culprits for who has allowed spending to
occur in violation of this executive
order. They're kind of the enforcement
arm of the Trump administration coming
in to settle that matter. That's right.
But though that's the story they gave,
the people I spoke with said it didn't
really hold up. Hm. Because these 57
names weren't on closer inspection
people who were likely to have had
anything to do with these payments. This
list of names was something quite
different. It was really the senior most
people in leadership roles from around
the agency. And so what it came to look
like was an attempt to decapitate USAD.
[Music]
Okay. So, as all these folks are
pursuing their own ends
and there's a lot of anger in the air
over the idea that rules are being
broken,
what happens next?
A few days later, Doge comes back and
presents to USA ID officials what they
call their evidence for why these 57
people should not get to come back to
their jobs. The evidence turns out to be
painfully thin. It consists of an email
that one of the members of the Doge team
sent his teammates a few days earlier in
which he said, quote, "Look, I reviewed
these aid payments since the order." And
then he lists some people who had access
to the system. And then he goes on to
say, I could be wrong.
>> So this is not the evidence required to
end the career of 57 leaders at USAD.
>> That is the judgment of the
professionals inside USAD. in particular
a gentleman named Nicholas Gotautleb
whose role is to oversee employee and
labor relations at USAD.
So this Nick Gatota suddenly becomes
another player in this saga.
>> He looks at this evidence and he says no
I cannot agree to keep these senior
leaders on leave based on this. This is
not sufficient. And then Nick got
two things that prove to be tremendously
important to the future of USA ID.
First, he sends an email to those 57
people saying, "Look, based on the
evidence, I've got no basis for keeping
you on leave."
>> But then, arguably more important, he
sends a memo to Jason Gray. He says he
will report DOA's actions to the Office
of Special Counsel, which investigates
wrongdoing and protects whistleblowers
and is meant to protect federal
employees. So, he threatens to begin
some sort of formal investigation of
what Doge has done.
>> Wow. So Nick Gotautle decides to stand
up and fight all this and ask for an
investigation into DOA's investigation
inside of USAD.
>> Yeah, it's really impossible to
overstate just what a big deal this was
in the eyes of Doge and Pete Morocco and
eventually the White House.
>> They viewed this as absolute
insubordination. Their view was, "How
dare this mid-level career federal civil
servant tell us what we can and cannot
do?"
>> This is the deep state personified.
>> This starts to look a lot like the deep
state and it set the tone for what
happened next. This is just 10 days in
to the new administration. So, right
away, they find Nick Gotautle and march
him out of the building. Wow.
>> But they don't stop there. They go to
Jason Gray and they say this action from
your employee from this Nick Gotle, it
shows that you've lost control of the
building. So they demanded that Jason
Gray try to regain control of the
building. And the way they wanted him to
do it was to lock out the entire staff
from their phone and email systems.
block out every single one of the
thousands of people who work at USAD
around the world from the technology
they use to work at USAD. That's right.
It's worth saying it's not clear how
wellthought out this idea was. I've
heard different versions of it. Someone
said not necessarily. They just wanted
to prepare a plan. They wanted the
option. But what Jason Gray heard by the
accounts of everyone I spoke with was
something that he viewed as too much. He
said, "We've got people in combat zones,
people delivering food in Gaza, people
fighting Ebola in Africa. I cannot lock
them out. That will put them in physical
danger. I won't do it."
>> People, he's really seeming to say,
could die.
>> That's right. He said people could die.
And that to him was the line he wouldn't
cross. And what that sounded like to the
administration was yet another example
of insubordination
from USAD. And within days, the agency
would effectively be shut down.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So Chris, once Jason Gray, the head of
USA ID, the Trump appointed head of USA
ID, says you can't freeze every employee
out of their computer system, their
phone system. What comes next on this
journey towards the end of the USA ID?
>> A lot of things happen really quickly.
One of them is as of the next morning,
Jason Gray has been removed from his
post as head of USAD. M and that's
really just the beginning. We're now
into the weekend. This is just the
second weekend. I cannot stress enough.
We are less than 2 weeks in,
>> right?
>> And this is when members of Doge begin
to go in and really aggressively begin
rooting through the files, turning off
social media, shutting down the website
of USA ID. Someone described it to me as
akin to the face of USA ID being erased.
So over this weekend, you can tell that
USA ID is in real trouble. At the same
time, thousands of staff members begin
losing access to their email accounts
and computer systems. So in the
background, the agency is starting to be
dismantled. But then it moves to the
foreground. This is Sunday afternoon.
We're about 13 days into the new
administration. What breaks out into the
public is a tweet from Elon Musk and he
writes, "USID is a criminal
organization. Time for it to die."
>> Not a lot of parsing to do of that
language. This is Elon Musk issuing a
kind of death sentence for this agency.
>> Yeah. And in hindsight, you know, it's
clear what that meant. But again,
remember at the time, this is also new.
People don't really know how much power
Doge has and they don't know how much
power Elon Musk has. Right? In theory,
if one is to stick to the law, Elon
Musk, who's not really a government
employee, certainly doesn't have the
authority to unilaterally end a
congressionallymandated
agency. So, this this tweet marks a
funny transition from a world where
those kinds of rules still matter to a
world where, oh, maybe Elon Musk and
Doge can just end US ID,
>> right? And the next day is when you can
really tell beyond a shadow of doubt USA
ID is not going to survive
>> because
>> because early on that day that Monday
two weeks in the administration is an
even more aggressive tweet from Elon
Musk and it reads we spent the weekend
feeding USA ID into the wood chipper
could gone to some great parties did
that instead. From there, staff who
worked in the Washington DC headquarters
were told to stay home. Later that day,
the State Department sent Congress a
letter saying they would move,
reorganize, or otherwise wind down USAD.
It even said, quote, "The remainder of
the agency may be abolished."
>> Chris, I just want to make sure I
understand the sequence of what happened
here based on your investigation. We get
this pretty confusing executive order
and a bunch of people at USA ID who
interpret it exactly as it's written and
that leaves folks like Pete Morocco
convinced that there's rampant
insubordination going on across the
agency. Doge comes in, starts punishing
people for being insubordinate, and
within a week or so, Doge is shutting
the whole place down. Is that more or
less right?
>> That is correct. And what it feels like
is revealed in your reporting is that
while an underlying ideology
might be behind the way the Trump
administration sees USA ID from the
beginning, right, which is America first
and foreign aid are not so compatible.
So USAD was always going to be suspect
to this administration. It feels like
the speed with which the agency just
evaporates
has a lot more to do with a few
individuals
becoming furious at what feels like a
very normal process of employees
engaging in a back and forth push and
pull around rules and process and the
reaction
being nuclear. You know this is
disobedience, this is resistance. we are
going to destroy your agency as a result
of it. And that all feels very outsized
given the facts that you found on the
ground. That's exactly right. And I
think you're you're landing on a really
important point, which is maybe those
two things aren't totally separate,
right? Maybe the style and substance of
government here affect each other,
right? The policy decisions that reflect
the ideology get influenced and
overtaken by sort of the style of
government, the combiveness,
the hostility towards career civil
servants, the suspicion of the deep
state and that sort of hostility uh and
animus comes to overtake or redirect the
policy goals. And those two things
rather than remaining separate become
sort of a cycle and they start
reinforcing each other leading to really
aggressive and fast outcomes that at the
beginning of just this short twoe period
probably would have been pretty hard to
predict because you had two combustible
elements interacting at the same time.
>> Right? But a clear lesson to have
emerged from this, and I know this is
complicated, is that the greater the
resistance from people inside of it to
what people from the administration
wanted, the greater the pain, the
trauma, and the gutting resulted.
>> I think that definitely describes what
happened at USAD. And I think that is in
fact the lesson that others took away
from from aid and from this early period
that it's easier not to fight. It's
easier just to give in. And we see that
in the behavior of some law firms of
some universities. I don't know if that
is though a general concept. Another
lesson might just be that USAD fought
back in the wrong way. They they thought
that just by appealing to the letter of
the law and to accepted HR practices,
they would be able to stop this
administration. They probably
underestimated the degree to which
officials would feel sort of personally
chagrined when they said no to their
demands. So the lesson of USAD to my
mind is
the the steps the Trump administration
will take to try to shut down an agency.
The steps they'll take in response to
what they perceive as insubordination.
They're unexpected and they can seem
really extreme. and USAD wasn't ready
for it. But as you apply that lesson to
the shutdown,
>> I wonder if what we see is
>> this is not a saga. This is not a battle
that unfolds along lines that make any
sense. This is not administration that's
following a particular strategy,
>> but instead they're reacting. They're
looking for openings. They're
aggressively pushing those openings. and
they've learned a different but maybe
more important lesson from USAD. And
that lesson is they can get away with
things like this. The consequences
don't always materialize. In other
words, if the Trump administration
decides that the shutdown is licensed to
go into an agency it doesn't like or
wants to severely reduce.
What the lesson of this all is for the
Trump administration is they can
probably do what they want and that was
true before the shutdown perhaps is even
truer now that the government is in
shutdown because it's concentrated the
president's authority over funding and
once they make a decision to go into an
agency any decision as we've talked
about any resistance could then be used
to very unpredictably
take something that seems small and turn
it into something very big and use it as
a rationale to transform maybe even end
an agency.
>> Exactly. One of the unexpected
conversations that's emerged from the
shutdown is even the Trump
administration needing to grapple with
is the government important. And the
reality of the USAD is that since it
happened so early, we now have had the
longest time to think about the
repercussions of it going away. And I
think we'd be remiss if we didn't for a
moment talk about what it has meant to
the world that USAD is now gone. Yeah.
This it what it looks like in real life
is people not getting HIV medication. Uh
mothers not getting life-saving care.
Starving children not getting emergency
nutrition packets. Countries that used
to get political assistance to remain
democracies is not getting that help.
Infrastructure that used to get built
for drinking water and sewage and
electricity and schools not being built.
uh it looks like the opposite of
progress all over the world and it's
it's already happening
>> right and that is no doubt of enormous
importance to the countries where USAD
was doing that work to the people doing
that work foreign policy experts would
tell you that over time this meant a lot
to America's ability to exercise soft
power and influence around the world
but at the same time
if You go walk the streets of the United
States and ask people do they miss US ID
and the work that it does and people are
being honest. I'm not sure the answer is
going to be we miss USA ID. I think the
answer is probably what was USA ID
again.
>> And that might be the most striking
lesson of all.
It showed the genius of Trump to
recognize, maybe not part of a plan,
maybe out of emotional spite, but
ultimately to recognize that he could do
what almost no president has done and
end a major agency and gamble that it
wouldn't cost him any meaningful
blowback from the public. And as of now,
it looks like he was right. H looks like
that gamble paid off. Which raises the
question in this shutdown. Well, if it
worked at USA ID, maybe he'll try it at
other agencies. Maybe when he threatens
to close quote Democrat agencies, maybe
he'll do it. And maybe it'll work out
for him again just like it did at USA
ID.
[Music]
Well, Chris, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
Great to be with you.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know.
today.
On Monday, Republican state lawmakers in
North Carolina said that they would soon
begin to redraw the state's
congressional maps to assure another
Republican seat in the US House of
Representatives before next year's
midterm elections. The effort would make
North Carolina the latest state to
fulfill President Trump's goal of trying
to retain Republican control of the
House by gerrymandering congressional
districts rather than winning
competitive elections.
This summer, Republican lawmakers in
Texas redrrew their state's election
maps to create five new
Republicanfriendly House seats, while
Republicans in Missouri redrrew its maps
to create one more Republican seat.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Michael
Simon Johnson, Mary Wilson, Shannon
Lynn, Diana Wyn, and Claire Tennis with
help from Nina Feldman. It was edited by
MJ Davis Lynn, Liz O. Balin, and Michael
Benois. Contains music by Marian Lozano,
Alicia Baude, Dan Powell, and Pat
McCusker. And was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]